add emilys ir door sensor (#75)
viam-devrel/viamcodelabs: site/viamguides/src/emily-door-lock/emily-door-lock.md

author: Joyce
id: emily-door-lock
summary: Monitor door lock position using an infrared sensor
categories: Getting-Started, Developer
environments: web
status: Published
feedback link: https://github.com/viam-devrel/viamcodelabs/issues
tags: Getting Started, Developer

# Detect door lock status with an infrared sensor

<!-- ------------------------ -->

## Overview

**Is my door locked?** If you leave your home, and you're unsure whether you locked your front door, this is a smarter way to check whether your front door is locked or unlocked.

In this codelab, you'll learn how to use an infrared sensor to see whether a door is locked or unlocked in realtime.

### What You’ll Build

- A Viam-powered internet-connected device that tells you whether your door is locked

  ![IR sensor mounted next to door lock](assets/hero.png)

### Prerequisites

> - A computer with MacOS, Windows, or Linux to flash your Raspberry Pi and configure the device's components using the Viam app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A computer with MacOS, Windows, or Linux to flash your ESP32 and configure the device's components using the Viam app
```

- Hardware and supplies requirements

>   - 1 - [ESP32 development board](https://a.co/d/fNsT6d7) - check the Viam docs for [specific resource requirements](https://docs.viam.com/installation/#compatibility)

Reviewer: This linked board only has 4MB of flash, which is half of the required amount. I've updated the link to one that meets the requirements and linked to the new docs page that lists them. 

```suggestion
  - 1 - [ESP32 development board](https://a.co/d/0liXUKP) - check the Viam docs for [specific resource requirements](https://docs.viam.com/operate/get-started/setup-micro/)
```

1. Mount the device next to the door you want to monitor, pointing the sensor in the direction of the door lock.
   ![overhead view of detector](assets/emilyOverhead.jpeg)
1. Add IR tape (or similar reflective material) to the deadbolt.
   ![side view of detector](assets/emilySideview.jpeg)
1. Test it again to make sure the sensor placed in the new position captures the readings accurately and reliably. A value of `0` should indicate a locked state, and `1` is unlocked.

### Remote access to door lock status

Now that your sensor is set up, you may not want to log in to the Viam app every time you want to check whether your door is locked or unloacked. There's a few options to consider:

- Download the Viam mobile application from the [Apple](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/viam-robotics/id6451424162) and [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.viam.viammobile&hl=en&gl=US) app stores to keep track of all your Viam machines, including this door lock status detector
- Develop your own custom mobile application using one of [Viam's SDKs](https://docs.viam.com/dev/reference/sdks/#mobile-sdk)

> - Set up a notification to alert you when you've left your home and your door is still unlocked, by [creating your own custom Viam module](https://docs.viam.com/operate/get-started/other-hardware/hello-world-module/)

Reviewer: This guide won't really help with the micro-rdk but we could link to the "modules for ESP32" docs page which provides a pretty minimal tutorial. 

```suggestion
- Set up a notification to alert you when you've left your home and your door is still unlocked, by [creating your own custom Viam module](https://docs.viam.com/operate/get-started/other-hardware/micro-module/)
```

Duration: 3

### What you learned

- How to use an IR sensor to detect state
- How to configure and test a device's components using Viam
- How to use an ESP32 with Viam
- How to configure OTA updates

### Real-world applications and projects for IR sensors

IR sensors are widely used for their simplicity, reliability, and low power consumption. Here are some real-world use cases where IR lock-state detection is useful:

- **Smart Home Security**: Detect whether a door is physically locked, and integrate with smart systems to send alerts or trigger automations based on the lock state.
- **Line-Following Robots**: Robots use multiple IR sensors to detect contrast between a black line and a white surface to follow predefined paths on warehouse floors or for material transport in manufacturing lines.
  ![line following robot](assets/lineFollower.jpeg)
- **Logging and Compliance**: Maintain a time-stamped record of door lock events for audit trails, particularly in healthcare or high-security environments.

### Building advanced features with Viam and IR sensors

Now that you have an IR sensor that detects whether a door is locked or unlocked based on reflected light, you can:

> - [Build your own Viam module](https://docs.viam.com/operate/get-started/other-hardware/hello-world-module/) to create custom logic to trigger alerts or actions when the door state changes, for example, send a notification or activate an alarm if the door is unlocked unexpectedly or left unlocked for a certain period of time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Build your own Viam module](https://docs.viam.com/operate/get-started/other-hardware/micro-module/) to create custom logic to trigger alerts or actions when the door state changes, for example, send a notification or activate an alarm if the door is unlocked unexpectedly or left unlocked for a certain period of time
```

- Extend the sensor's functionality by integrating it with actuators to trigger a servo mechanism or LED based on the sensor reading

> - [Add more components and services](https://docs.viam.com/platform/#the-things-that-make-up-a-machine) to enhance your automation setup, such as aan office sentry that lights an LED indicator if a room door is not properly closed and locked after hours

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Add more components and services](https://docs.viam.com/platform/#the-things-that-make-up-a-machine) to enhance your automation setup, such as an office sentry that lights an LED indicator if a room door is not properly closed and locked after hours
```
